Add note about XML C0 characters adding restrictions (#681)
unicode-org/message-format-wg: spec/data-model/README.md

To that end, they relax some aspects of the data model, such as allowing
declarations, options, and attributes to be optional rather than required properties.

> [!NOTE]
> Users relying on XML representations of messages should note that

> > XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+0019),

Reviewer: ```suggestion
> XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+001F)
```

Author: D'oh!

> and XML 1.1 does not allow for the representation of a U+0000 NULL character.
> These characters are allowed in MessageFormat 2 messages,
> so systems and users relying on XML as a resource format might need to

> > apply additional restrictions on message characters.

Reviewer: ... or provide an alternative escape mechanism for these characters.

RDF* for example uses `\u` and `\U` notations to allow non-XML chars. Note that by design our syntax does not provide these domain-specific escapes... exactly so that domains *can* provide them.

Author: ```suggestion
> so systems and users relying on XML as a resource format might need to
> apply additional restrictions on message characters
> or provide an alternative escape mechanism for these characters.
```

> > or provide an alternative escape mechanism for these characters.

Reviewer: The mention of "resource format" is not applicable here? This is the data model! Perhaps:

```suggestion
> so systems and users relaying on this XML representation for interchange
> might need to apply additional restrictions on

Author: Updated suggestion to not change "relying" to "relaying".

To that end, they relax some aspects of the data model, such as allowing
declarations, options, and attributes to be optional rather than required properties.

> [!NOTE]
> Users relying on XML representations of messages should note that

> > XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+001F)
> > and XML 1.1 does not allow for the representation of a U+0000 NULL character.
> > These characters are allowed in MessageFormat 2 messages,

Author: ```suggestion
> XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+001F).
> Except for U+0000 NULL , these characters are allowed in MessageFormat 2 messages,
```

> so systems and users relying on XML as a resource format might need to
> apply additional restrictions on message characters

> > or provide an alternative escape mechanism for these characters.

Reviewer 2: I may be missing something, but these work-arounds don't address @bhaible's concern about interoperability between implementations. They recommend a path for producing valid XML within a single implementation.

Can you give an example of restrictions or escape mechanism that you had in mind here?

Author: A possible restriction would be to require all messages to contain no C0 control codes.

A possible escape mechanism would be to use backslash escapes like `\u0000` in the serialised XML for control codes, which would necessitate a custom parser and serialiser.

Both of these could be applied on top of what we are presenting here. Alternatively, if we accept #682, then sticking to XML 1.1 would provide built-in support for all valid MF2 messages.

Reviewer 2: Thanks. If I understand @bhaible's feedback, both of these mechanism will render the implementation not operable with other, different implementations. In other words, if I restrict all messages to avoid C0 codes, then I cannot accept as input a message produced by an implementation which doesn't have that restriction.

I think #682 + recommending XML 1.1 would be a more robust work-around, as you say.

Reviewer 3: > I think https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/pull/682 + recommending XML 1.1 would be a more robust work-around

When it comes to interoperability between implementations, most likely an XML document will be exchanged between the two implementations. Since XML 1.1, for XML documents, also forbids the C0 control characters (see https://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xml11-20060816/#sec-well-formed definitions [1] and [2a]), there is no advantage in recommending XML 1.1. In this respect, XML 1.1 is as bad as XML 1.0.

Author: But XML 1.1 does allow for character reference escapes for the control characters #x1 through #x1F, yes?

Reviewer 3: > But XML 1.1 does allow for character reference escapes for the control characters #x1 through #x1F, yes?

Yes, it does. Quoting https://www.w3.org/TR/2006/REC-xml11-20060816/#sec-xml11 :
"XML 1.1 allows the use of character references to the control characters #x1 through #x1F, most of which are forbidden in XML 1.0. For reasons of robustness, however, these characters still cannot be used directly in documents."

So, I withdraw my statement that "XML 1.1 is as bad as XML 1.0".

But trying to validate the XML 1.1 document
```
<?xml version="1.1" encoding="UTF-8" ?>
<foo>
  <bar>C0 control &#0001;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0002;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0003;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0004;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0005;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0006;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0007;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0008;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0011;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0012;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0014;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0015;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0016;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0017;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0018;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0019;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0020;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0021;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0022;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0023;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0024;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0025;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0026;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0027;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0028;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0029;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0030;</bar>
  <bar>C0 control &#0031;</bar>
</foo>
```
I see that all three validators that I had used in https://github.com/unicode-org/message-format-wg/issues/669#issuecomment-1952811014 don't support XML 1.1, only XML 1.0.

So, while relying on XML 1.1 would fix the problem in theory, in practice it loses, since XML 1.1 is hardly supported by software.

Even the XML support in Microsoft .NET does not support version 1.1: https://stackoverflow.com/questions/76124030/

> > Users relying on XML representations of messages should note that
> > XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+001F)
> > and XML 1.1 does not allow for the representation of a U+0000 NULL character.
> > These characters are allowed in MessageFormat 2 messages,
> > so systems and users relying on XML as a resource format might need to
> > apply additional restrictions on message characters
> > or provide an alternative escape mechanism for these characters.

Reviewer 2: How about something like the following instead?

```suggestion
> Users relying on XML representations of messages should note that
> XML 1.0 does not allow for the representation of all C0 control characters (U+0000-U+001F).
> These characters are allowed in valid MessageFormat 2 messages.
> Thus, XML 1.1 is recommended for representing serialized MessageFormat 2 messages.
>  
> However, in MessageFormat 2 Tech Preview, valid messages may contain the U+0000 NULL character,
> which cannot be represented in XML 1.1.
> Systems and users relying on XML as a resource format might need to
> apply additional restrictions on message characters
> or provide an alternative escape mechanism for the U+0000 NULL character.
```

Reviewer: (as individual contributor) 

It isn't just NULL that's a problem in XML 1.0 and, as noted, XML 1.1 isn't really a thing we can use.

Instead of mucking around with this, I think we're better off saying that some messages can't be serialized in the TP's XML data model. We can fix this _during_ the preview.

Reviewer 2: Agreed. I was trying to suggest an improvement to the note's phrasing based on the assumption that we *could* recommend XML 1.1, and to make room for #682. At this point, however, it's best to not make any late changes hastily.

Reviewer 4: +1

If localizable strings are stored in XML and some platform needs the controls for some reason,
they might already have a way to represent them for non MF2 messages.
If we add our own mechanism we only add to the confusion.

For example XLIFF has [`<cp>`](https://docs.oasis-open.org/xliff/xliff-core/v2.1/os/xliff-core-v2.1-os.html#cp)

Let's say my exiting XML use the same convention.
If a tool want to save "Hello <the real 0003 character> world" into such a file it has no way to know if it should escape as `<cp hex="0003"/>`, or as `\u0003` (MF2).
Because just by looking at a string there is no way to tell what API is used on it.
So the safe thing is to escape with the storage convention (`<cp hex="0003"/>`),
And we only introduce the MF2 complexity for no good reason.
